
 = = Performance Evaluation Of The Maxwell 16 System For Extraction Of Influenza Virus Rna From Diverse Samples = =

 = = = Introduction = = =

 The grave threat posed either by the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus or by another emerging virus like the 2009 pandemic H1N1 (pH1N1) requires rapid laboratory detection of the first cases or clusters of influenza infection. PCR-based nucleic acid (NA) assays are the first-choice techniques for flu surveillance and diagnosis due to their rapidity, sensitivity and specificity, although virus isolation is still critical for antigenic analysis and characterization of influenza virus (flu-v).

NA extraction is a crucial prerequisite for PCR analysis. Conventional manual extraction methods are labor-intensive, susceptible to contamination and handling variations. The demand for automated systems has grown markedly as a result of increasing PCR testing since the onset of pH1N1, especially at regional clinical and public health laboratories where specially trained staff are limited. Most automated extractors are designed to batch a significant number of samples and are not suitable for smaller laboratories because the costs of equipment, its maintenance, space requirements and need for disposables are prohibitive. Recently, the Maxwell 16 System (Promega, US), a compact and simple desk-top unit, was developed to extract viral total NA automatically from human plasma or serum samples based on a magnetic bead separation technique. Its performance has been evaluated by the manufacturer using hepatitis B and C virus, cytomegalovirus samples, etc. However, no formal assessment of extracting flu-v RNA via this system has so far been reported.

Therefore, in this study, we evaluated the performance of the Maxwell 16 System in extracting flu-v RNA for diagnosis of flu by using Real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RRT-PCR). Several sample pretreatment procedures of this system were first investigated for the recovery of flu-v RNA. The system's analytical sensitivity, linearity, precision and performance on clinical and field samples, reagent costs and extraction times were next compared with those of a commonly used column-based method (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit; QIAGEN, Germany). The risk of cross-contamination during automated processing was also assessed.

 = = = Ethics Statement = = =

 This study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (permit number S240). Written informed consent was obtained from all human participants on or before each study.

 = = = Virus Stock = = =

 To ensure that all the samples could be handled safely within containment level 2 facilities, a pH1N1 isolate A/Zhongshan/ SWL02/2009(H1N1) (pH1N1SWL02) was used as a representative human/avian flu-v for investigation of sample pretreatment, mock-infected sample preparation and evaluation assays. This virus was propagated and titrated in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells to contain 10 5.7 50% tissue culture infective doses (TCID 50) per ml. After serial 10-fold dilution of the virus culture supernatant with viral transport medium (VTM), aliquots of the virus were stored at -70uC prior to use to avoid multiple freeze-thaw cycles.

 = = = Clinical And Field Samples = = =

 Throat swabs. A total of 49 throat swabs were retrospectively selected for this study. These samples had been characterized by PCR as positive (strong, medium or weak) for pH1N1, seasonal flu A/H1, H3, or flu B virus.

Bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALFs). 32 BALFs were taken from patients in intensive care units with various diseases requiring bronchoalveolar lavage for diagnosis or treatment. After vortex for 2 min and centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 min, the supernatants of BALFs were tested by RRT-PCR with the CDC protocol. One BALF was determined to be pH1N1 positive. The remaining 31 negative BALF supernatants without viscous phlegm were used to prepare mock-infected BALFs by mixing 100 ml of the pH1N1SWL02 stock (10 -4 dilution) with 900 ml of the BALF supernatant.

Pooled fecal samples. Human feces were obtained from healthy subjects and fresh poultry droppings were collected from cages of live poultry in four markets. To increase heterogeneity of small samples, every three fecal samples from the same type of subject were combined into one mixture. Specifically, three 100mg feces from three individuals were added to 3 ml VTM and homogenized by shaking for 20 min. The fecal suspensions (10%, W/V) were then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 min, and the obtained supernatants were used as fecal matrices. The resulting 60 samples comprised chicken, duck, silkie, quail, pigeon, chukar (n = 7 for each) and human (n = 18) fecal pools. Ten poultry fecal pools were identified to be positive for flu A virus by a commercial RRT-PCR kit; 50 flu-v RRT-PCR negative fecal pools were used to prepare mock-infected samples by mixing 100 ml of the pH1N1SWL02 stock (10 -4 dilution) with 900 ml of the fecal supernatant.

 = = = Rna Extraction = = =

 Maxwell 16 system. An optimal temperature (56uC) and optimal time (10 min) were chosen and used for sample lysis in fluv RNA extraction by this system in terms of RNA recovery from the pH1N1SWL02 stocks at high, medium and low concentrations (data not shown). After an initial lysis of sample followed by transfer of the sample lysate to Maxwell 16 LEV Cartridge, the remaining purification process was fully automated by the extractor in Viral Mode. The sample input of 200 ml and output of 50 ml, which were designated as standard Maxwell 16 protocol (Maxwell 16-S), were chosen based on the manufacturer's recommendation and our pilot study. A modified protocol (Maxwell 16-M), in which both sample input and output were 100 ml, was also employed for flu-v RNA extraction from fecal samples.

QIAamp kit. RNA extraction using the QIAamp Kit was performed in parallel with the Maxwell 16 System for comparative evaluation. Purified RNA from 140-ml sample was eluted in 60-ml Buffer AVE (QIAGEN, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

 = = = Rrt-Pcr Assays = = =

 The CDC Flu A/B and RP primer/probe sets in combination with the CDC RRT-PCR protocol were applied to the detection of universal flu A and B viruses, and human RNase P gene (RP) that serves as an internal positive control for human RNA. All samples were tested in duplicate on an ABI 7500 Fast System with the Superscript III Platinum One-step qRT-PCR Kit (Invitrogen, US). ROX reference dye was added at a final concentration of 50 nM to normalize the fluorescent reporter signal. The threshold cycle (Ct), representing the point at which amplification of NA is detected above background fluorescence, was used as a measure of relative RNA yield. The cut-off of the assays was set at a Ct-value of 40.

 = = = Statistical Analysis = = =

 All statistical data were processed using SPSS 13.0 software. Linearity was assessed by regression analysis. The standard deviation for determination of inter-and intra-run coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated from one-way ANOVA. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was performed to compare Ct value differences between the two methods except that the paired t-test was used to compare Ct values of RP. The McNemar test was used for comparison of detection rates between the two methods. P,0.05 was considered as significant.

 = = = Analytical Sensitivity And Linearity = = =

 Dilution series ranging from pure to 10 -8 of the pH1N1SWL02 stock were extracted in triplicate for each dilution by Maxwell 16-S and QIAamp Kit, respectively. The viral RNA was then tested by the CDC Flu A RRT-PCR. Good linearities were observed over a 7-log concentration range with R 2 -values of 0.999 and 0.998, and slopes of 3.399 and 3.407, respectively, for the Maxwell 16-S and QIAamp methods. Extraction by the automated procedure yielded lower Ct values (0.71 cycles on average) at all dilutions within the linearity range compared to the manual procedure. According to preliminary evaluation of sensitivity from data for the linearity experiment, dilutions of 10 -6, 10 -7 and 10 -8 were chosen, and an additional seven replicates of the each dilution were extracted by Maxwell 16-S and QIAamp Kit for determination of analytical sensitivity. The results of 20 measurements in sum by RRT-PCR for each of the three dilutions are summarized in. After extraction with Maxwell 16-S, flu-v was detected in all measurements at a dilution of 10 -6, 15 of 20 measurements at a dilution of 10 -7 and 4 of 20 measurements at a dilution of 10 -8. In contrast, after QIAamp extraction, RRT-PCR detected flu-v in all measurements at a dilution of 10 -6, 14 of 20 measurements at a dilution of 10 -7 and 2 of 20 measurements at a dilution of 10 -8.

 = = = Precision And Cross-Contamination = = =

 The effect of automated sample preparation on the precision of RRT-PCR was estimated by extracting 10 -2, 10 -4 and 10 -6 dilutions of the pH1N1SWL02 stock with the Maxwell 16-S compared to the QIAamp method. Quadruplicates per dilution for each of 4 runs were performed on 4 consecutive days. Both methods achieved high precision, i.e., the intra-and inter-run coefficients of variation (CV) ranged from 1.19% to 1.46% and 1.07% to 1.62% for the automated procedure, and from 0.62% to 1.42% and 0.42% to 2.09% for the manual method over the three measured concentrations. To address the possibility of cross-contamination between samples within the Maxwell 16 Instrument, 3 batches of 8 reagent-blank samples were coextracted in an alternating pattern with the high-titer virus samples used in precision determination across the cartridge rack. No false-positive results of RRT-PCR were observed in the blank samples.

 = = = Detection Of Flu-V In Various Samples = = =

 All respiratory samples after extraction by either the Maxwell 16-S or QIAamp method exhibited positive RP reactions by RRT-PCR with Ct values less than 37. The differences between the median Ct values of RP obtained with Maxwell 16-S and QIAamp Kit were -2.13 (P,0.001) for throat swabs and -0.95 (P = 0.001) for BALFs (). All throat swabs after extraction with the two methods also tested positive for flu A or B virus by RRT-PCR. The Maxwell 16-S yielded lower Ct values in 42/49 throat swabs than the QIAamp method, with the median Ct difference being -0.64 cycles (P,0.001) ()

 = = = User Convenience Of The Maxwell 16 System = = =

 The estimated hands-on time was reduced by ca. 31 min for extraction of 6 samples and by ca. 39 min for 16 samples with the automated method compared to the manual method, although both methods were almost equivalent in total extraction time (). The list prices (cost per extraction) of the kits for Maxwell 16 System and QIAamp method are similar in China, but the former is much more expensive than the latter in the United States (). Still, the Maxwell 16 System features other conveniences: (i) any number of specimens (up to 16) can be processed per run; (ii) viral DNA and RNA can be co-purified, which was particularly useful for screen testing of multi-pathogens such as diverse respiratory viruses in one specimen; iii) very little maintenance and training are required due to the prefilled reagent cartridge and simplified design.

 = = = Discussion = = =

 Earlier reports found that magnetic particle-based automated systems could be inferior, close or superior to manual column methods for recovering viral RNA from various sample types, moreover, the automated systems generally brought about high precision and hands-on time reduction. Our data demonstrated that Maxwell 16-S RNA extraction had good linearity and precision over a wide concentration range and higher sensitivity in detection of stock flu-v in VTM than the QIAamp method.

To extend its applicability to clinical and field samples, the Maxwell 16-S was tested for RNA extraction from respiratory and fecal samples from humans as well as poultry. The performance of this automated procedure on the respiratory samples (including throat swabs and BALFs) was largely in agreement with its analytic performance on the virus stock. That is, greater sensitivity reflected by the lower Ct values for both the viral and cellular RNA was obtained from Maxwell 16-S compared with the QIAamp method. In contrast to the reference method and indicated by internal positive control, fewer or no PCR inhibitors existed in the throat swabs after Maxwell 16-S extraction. Similar findings were noted by Reznikov et al., who found that throat swabs were free of PCR inhibitor, and by Loens et al., who validated that a magnetic particle-based automated system extracted NA more efficiently from throat swabs (higher recovery and/or fewer inhibitors) than a QIAamp column method, and observed that PCR inhibitors existed in fewer throat swabs. BALFs contained high concentrations of compounds inhibiting PCR that could not be removed by various methods. In our study, comparison of Ct values between viral controls and the virusspiked BALFs extracted by the same method clearly revealed that these inhibitory effects of BALFs on RT-PCR were reduced after extraction by Maxwell 16-S compared to the QIAamp method, which might contribute to the higher sensitivity of Maxwell 16-S in this sample matrix.

Fecal material (feces, rectal or cloacal swabs) is an alternative matrix for detection of flu-v in poultry as well as in humans. However, the fecal matrix has been recognized as a difficult and heterogeneous sample matrix for molecular analysis owing to its complex chemical composition and potential for PCR inhibition. In our study, RNA extracts from fecal samples by Maxwell 16-S possessed more inhibitors than those obtained by the QIAamp method, which resulted in the reduced detection sensitivity of the former method. The inhibitors may act not only on the PCR amplification process, but also on pre-PCR processing procedures. Therefore, a proper reduction in starting sample volume may outcompete dilution of extracts alone (also including an increase of elution volume) in removing inhibitors. This concept was supported by the findings that all the same fecal samples that showed false-negative results after Maxwell 16-S extraction and partially positive results when their extracts were diluted 10-fold were detected as positive after Maxwell 16-M extraction. The differential performances of Maxwell 16 System between the respiratory samples and fecal samples suggest that an increase in input and/or a decrease in output is beneficial for NA detection for some sample matrices with concentrated NA, but may be detrimental for other sample matrices that possesses increased inhibitors, and vice versa. Supporting evidence also comes from the detection of SARS coronavirus by RRT-PCR, the sensitivity of which increased with increased input of nasopharyngeal aspirate or human plasma, whereas remained the same or decreased with increased input of feces. Moreover, in our study, the Ct values of fecal samples after Maxwell 16-M extraction were improved in samples with higher inhibitor concentrations but delayed in samples with no or fewer inhibitors after Maxwell 16-S extraction (Appendix S1). Therefore, the sample volume should be optimized to balance the recovery of RNA and the removal of inhibitors in the application of the Maxwell 16 System to every sample type. The risk of cross-contamination between samples is a concern due to the full opening of reagent cartridges during automated sample processing. However, no cross-contamination of negative samples by adjacent strongly positive samples occurred in our assays. The Maxwell 16 System utilizing magnetic particles to handle sample transfer and disposable plungers that shield magnetic handlers might both contribute to minimizing the possibility of cross-contamination.

In conclusion, the performance characteristics of the Maxwell 16 System enable its use for diagnosis of flu and viral load determination. However, this system possesses different abilities to remove inhibitors from respiratory samples and fecal samples, which subsequently exert an effect on the detection sensitivity. For challenging samples such as feces, a proper reduction in starting sample volume may improve the detection of flu-v. In spite of the initial investment requirement for the instrument and the relatively high cost of the kit, this system offers the distinct advantages of flexible sample throughput, co-extraction of viral RNA and DNA, reduction of hands-on time, minimal maintenance and training and little or no risk of cross-contamination.

 = = = Supporting Information = = =

 Appendix S1 Detailed Ct values obtained for pooled fecal samples after extraction by Maxwell 16-S, Maxwell 16-M and QIAamp method*. (XLS)


 = = The Role Of Wobble Uridine Modifications In +1 Translational Frameshifting In Eukaryotes = =

 = = = Introduction = = =

 Transfer of genetic information from mRNA into proteins is the most energy consuming process in the cell and the translation machinery needs to decode mRNAs with high efficiency and fidelity. Even though the translational machinery transfers the information in mRNA into protein with high fidelity, errors occur at a low frequency. Missense errors are in most cases not harmful to the function of a protein, since such errors alter only one single amino acid, which will not interfere with the function or stability of the protein if they occur in non-critical positions. In contrast, processivity errors, like frameshift errors, are detrimental, since they completely change the amino acid sequence downstream of the frameshift site. Moreover, following such an error, the ribosome frequently encounters a stop codon in the new reading frame resulting in premature termination of translation. Accordingly, the frequency of frameshift errors is about 10-fold lower than the frequency of missense errors.

There are many examples where alterations in the tRNA structure, e.g. lack of a modified nucleoside, will affect the fidelity of reading frame maintenance. In bacteria, modified nucleosides of different chemical structures, present in different positions, and in different species of the tRNA all prevent frameshifts errors. In eukaryotes, both wyosin (yW) and queosine (Q) in rabbit reticulocytes as well as other modified nucleosides present in the anticodon loop of eukaryotic tRNAs are important to maintain the reading frame. Synthesis of yW in yeast tRNA occurs in several steps and whereas fully modified yW has a low frequency of frameshifting, presence of any of the various intermediates in the synthesis of yW all increase frameshifting. Also, lack of either cyclic N6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine (ct 6 A) at position 37 or pseudouridine () at position 38 and 39 in yeast tRNA increases +1 frameshifting. Relevant for this study, the modified wobble nucleoside 5methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine (mnm 5 s 2 U) present in bacterial tRNA specific for Gln, Lys and Glu, is important for proper reading frame maintenance (The wobble nucleoside is in position of the tRNA and we denote such a nucleoside as N where N is any nucleoside.) (1 (1. Apparently, modification status both in bacteria and in eukaryotes is important for a proper reading frame maintenance.

A peptidyl-tRNA slippage model of how tRNA modification deficiency may induce frameshifting errors is well established. According to this model) modification deficient aminoacyl-tRNAs present Dual-error frameshifting model. Modification deficient tRNAs can induce frameshifting by either an A-or a P-site effect, or a combination thereof. (A) Lack of wobble uridine modification reduces the efficiency of the ternary complex (aminoacyl-tRNA*eEF1A*GTP, here shorten as aminoacyl-tRNA) to be accepted to the A-site, allowing a near cognate aminoacyl-tRNA to be accepted in the A-site. After translocation to the P-site, the near cognate tRNA slips into an alternative reading frame, as it does not perfectly fit in the P-site. (B) Lack of wobble uridine modification reduces the efficiency of the cognate aminoacyl-tRNA to be accepted to the A-site, which induces a pause that allows the tRNA in the P-site to frameshift. (C) The hypomodified aminoacyl-tRNA is able to enter the A-site and translocate to the P-site where it then slips into an alternative reading frame due to a reduced ribosomal grip.

in a ternary complex, i.e. aminoacyl-tRNA*eEF1A*GTP (here shorten as aminoacyl-tRNA) induces frameshifts either by causing an A-or a P-site effect, or a combination thereof. Lack of modification causes a defect in the cognate aminoacyl-tRNA selection step (we denote such an error as an A-site effect by modification deficiency), allowing a ternary complex with a near cognate wild type aminoacyl-tRNA instead of a cognate aminoacyl-tRNA to be accepted in the A-site. After translocation to the P-site, the fit of the near cognate peptidyl-tRNA is not optimal why it slips one nucleotide forward (+1 frameshift) (). Alternatively, lack of a modified nucleoside reduces the efficiency by which a cognate aminoacyl-tRNA is accepted to the Asite, which induces a ribosomal pause allowing the wild type peptidyl-tRNA to slip forward one nucleotide (denoted an A-site effect by modification deficiency,). When frameshifting is caused by a P-site effect, the hypomodified tRNA is efficiently accepted to the A-site, translocates to the P-site where its fit is not optimal why it slips into an alternative reading frame due to a reduced ribosomal grip (P-site effect by modification deficiency,) (3,6,20,21,23).

Thus, in some cases, the modification deficiency reduces the rate of selection of the aminoacyl-tRNA (A-site effect) but also lack of the modification reduces the ribosomal grip in the P-site (P-site effect). Note, in all cases explained above, the error in reading frame maintenance is due to a peptidyl-tRNA slippage.

Modifications of uridines in the wobble position of tRNAs are frequent in all three domains of life. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, there are 11 tRNA species having four related modified uridine nucleotides at wobble position. These modified nucleosides are 5-carbamoylmethyluridine (ncm 5 U 34) present in five, 5-carbamoylmethyl-2 -Omethyluridine (ncm 5 U 34 m) present in one, 5methoxycarbonylmethyluridine (mcm 5 U 34) present in two and 5-methoxycarbonylmethyl-2-thiouridine (mcm 5 s 2 U 34) present in three tRNA species (Figures 2 and 3).

The first step in the synthesis of the mcm 5 and ncm 5 groups of the uridine modifications mentioned above requires the six-subunit Elongator complex and its seven as- sociated proteins (Reviewed in). Mutations in any of the corresponding genes result in deficiency of these xm 5 -uridine modifications without affecting stability or aminoacylation of tRNA. These mutants also show strong pleiotropic phenotypes, such as defects in growth, transcription, chromatin remodelling, DNA repair and secretion (Reviewed in). All these phenotypes, except lack of xm 5 side chains, are suppressed by overexpression of hypomodified tRNAs specific for Gln, Lys and Glu that in a wild type contains mcm 5 s 2 U 34. It was concluded that lack of this wobble nucleoside reduces the efficiency to recognize the cognate codons for these tR-NAs, which is compensated by an increased concentration of the modification deficient tRNA. Thus, the many different phenotypes of Elongator mutants are due to reduced efficiency in translating some key mRNAs encoding proteins important for manifesting a correct phenotype.

In bacteria, modified wobble uridines are important to prevent +1 frameshifting. In eukaryotes, only a limited study has been done, which focused on the influence of the esterified methyl group of mcm 5 U 34 in reading frame maintenance. However, no specific conclusion was made where the frameshift errors occur, since the frameshift window used was very large. Therefore, no extensive information of the role of modified wobble uridines in reading frame maintenance is available for eukaryotic tRNA. It was therefore important to investigate whether or not lack of the xm 5 U or mcm 5 s 2 U modifications are crucial for reading frame maintenance. Here, we show that presence of xm 5 -(x, any substitution) or s 2 side groups at wobble uridines in yeast is pivotal in maintaining the translational reading frame.

 = = = Strains, Media And Genetic Procedures = = =

 The source and genotypes of yeast strains used in this study are listed in. E. coli strain used was DH5α (Bethesda Research Laboratories). Yeast transformation, media and genetic procedures have been described previously.

 = = = Plasmid Constructions = = =

 Plasmid pJD375 contains a Renilla/Firefly luciferase bicistronic reporter system. To introduce various frameshifting windows between the luciferase genes, a BamHI-XhoI fragment from plasmid pJD375 containing the Firefly luciferase gene was cloned into corresponding sites of YCp50, generating plasmid YCp50-Firefly. Two complementary oligonucleotides carrying various frameshifting windows (see were annealed into the BamHI and SacI sites of YCp50-Firefly. The newly constructed plasmids were digested with restriction enzymes (BamHI and XhoI) and fragments containing the frameshifting sites linked to the Firefly luciferase gene were cloned back into the corresponding sites of pJD375 restoring the bicistronic reporter system with the frameshifting window.

Plasmids pMB38-9mer (FF and WT) contain a HIS4A::lacZ reporter cassette. In pMB38-9merFF (inframe control construct), the lacZ gene is in 0 frame, while in pMB38-9merWT (test construct), the lacZ gene is in +1 frame (). These plasmids were used as templates for PCR oligonucleotide directed mutagenesis to alter the Ty1 sequence (CTT-AGG-C) (and.

For the overexpression of the Lys-tRNA encoded by the tK(UUU)L gene, we first introduced SphI and NheI restriction sites to plasmids pMB38-9mer (FF and WT) carrying the 'CUU-AAA-C' sequence by PCR oligonucleotide directed mutagenesis. Oligonucleotides used were 5 -GGTGTCGGGGCGCATGCATGACCCAGTCAC-3 and 5 -AGAGTGCACCATATGCGGTGTGAGCT AGCGCACAGATGCG-3. The tK(UUU)L gene was amplified from strain UMY2067 by using oligonucleotides 5 AAAAGCATGCCGGTAGAGTCTCTT-CTTGGTC-3 and 5 AAAAGCTAGCCGGTA-AGAGAGAAACCTCCA-3 and cloned between SphI and NheI sites of these plasmids.

 = = = Dual-Luciferase Assays = = =

 Three individual transformants of each dual luciferase assay construct (biological replicates) were grown at 30 • C in synthetic complete (SC)-Ura medium to an optical density at 600 nm (OD 600) of 0.5. For each transformant triplicate samples (technical replicates) of 10 l cells were collected and kept at -80 • C. The luciferase assays were performed according to the instructions of Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega, Catalog No. E1960). The luciferase activities were determined in a white 96-well plate (Thermo Scientific, #436111) using a TECAN infinite 200 luminometer. The levels of +1 frameshifting (%) were determined by normalization of each biological test replicate with the average of the three biological replicates of the in-frame control. Each value of the biological replicates was determined by taking the median of the three technical replicates. The significant differences between wild type and mutant were determined by two-tail t-test.

 = = = ␤-Galactosidase Assays = = =

 Three transformants of each Ty1 assay construct (biological replicates) were grown in SC-Ura to OD 600 ≈0.5 and 20 OD 600 -units were collected and kept at -20 • C. For each transformant, ␤-galactosidase measurements were done three times (technical replicates). ␤-galactosidase activities were determined as described previously. Values of the biological replicates were determined by taking the median of the technical replicates. The levels of +1 frameshifting (%) were determined by normalization of each biological test replicate with the average of the three biological replicates of the in-frame control. The significant differences between wild type and mutant were determined by two-tail t-test.

 = = = Assay System = = =

 To analyze the role of wobble uridine modifications ncm U, ncm Um, mcm U or mcm s 2 U in reading frame maintenance, we used defined yeast mutants unable to form the s 2. (A) Schematic drawing of the dual-luciferase assay system. Transcription of the genes encoding the Renilla-and Firefly-luciferase is under the ADH1 promoter and terminated by CYC1 terminator. Frameshift sites were cloned between the luciferase genes and expression of the Firefly luciferase gene requires +1 frameshifting. The frameshifting site is as follows: XXX-slippery site, NNN-assay codon and UAG-stop codon (all in-frame). An upstream stop codon (UAG) was placed in the +1 frame to eliminate frameshifting events occurring before the assay site. The frame of the different luciferase genes is indicated. In the in-frame control construct, Renilla-and Firefly-luciferase genes are in-frame. (B) Schematic drawing of the Ty1 assay system. Transcription from HIS4 promoter generates a transcript containing the first 100 nucleotides of the HIS4 gene in the in-frame and the lacZ gene of Escherichia coli in the +1 frame. Expression of the lacZ gene is dependent on a +1 ribosomal frameshift event taking place within Ty1 sequence. An upstream stop codon (UGA) was placed in the +1 reading frame to eliminate frameshifting events occurring before the assay site. In the in-frame control construct, the first 100 nucleotides of the HIS4 gene and lacZ gene are in-frame.

group (tuc1Δ; also denoted as ncs6Δ), the ncm 5 or mcm 5 groups (elp3Δ) or the esterified methyl group (trm9Δ) of the mcm 5 side chain. The ribosomal +1 frameshifting assay system used contains a Renilla luciferase (R-luc)/ Firefly luciferase (F-luc) bicistronic reporter system () (see Material and Methods). This bicistronic mRNA synthesizes a two domain protein with the indicated enzymatic activities. To analyze a +1 frameshift event a sequence is introduced between these two cistrons in such a way that translation of Rluc is in the 0 frame and the F-luc is in the +1 frame (). To obtain F-luc activity the ribosome must shift into the +1 frame before entering the F-luc gene. The inserted sequence between the R-luc and the F-luc reporter genes consists of a slippery codon (XXX) at which the peptidyl-tRNA will slip, the codon to be assayed for A-site selection (NNN), followed by a stop codon in zero frame (UAG) (). To terminate all ribosomes that have accidentally slipped into the +1 frame upstream the slippery codon, a stop codon was inserted in the +1 frame just a few nucleotides upstream the slippery codon (See. Thus, to obtain F-luc activity a +1 frameshift must occur at the +1 frameshift sequence upstream of the stop codon in the zero frame. This construct results in a very short frameshifting window between the upstream stop codon in the +1 frame and the downstream in-frame stop codon. The slippery codon is determined individually for different assay sites in order to optimize the slippage of the peptidyl tRNA at the P-site. We chose UUU, CCC or GGG codons as the slippery codons (Supplementary and). Codon UUU is decoded by tRNA Phe GAA, which has the wobble nucleoside Gm 34, and its structure is not affected by the elp3, tuc1 or trm9 mutations. Codon CCC is read by the I 34 (inosine) containing tRNA Pro IGG and the ncm 5 U 34 containing tRNA Pro ncm 5 UGG and the slippery codon GGG is read by the mcm 5 U 34 containing tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC and the C 34 containing tRNA Gly CCC. Note that the structures of the ncm 5 U containing tRNA Pro ncm 5 UGG reading the slippery codon CCC and the mcm 5 U 34 containing tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC reading the slippery codon GGG are affected by the elp3 mutation and might therefore obscure the monitoring of an A-site effect at these test codons. These issues will be addressed below. As a control, we used a construct carrying the R-luc and F-luc genes in-frame. By dividing the ratio of F-luc/R-luc activities generated from the frameshifting construct with the ratio of activities from the F-luc/R-luc in-frame control, the level of frameshifting was revealed. Using these reporter systems, the level of frameshifting for specific tRNA isoacceptors was investigated in the presence or absence of s 2, ncm 5, mcm 5 groups or the esterified methyl group of the mcm 5 side chain at U 34.

In the bacterial system, modification deficiency of aminoacyl-tRNA in the ternary complex causes in most cases a slow entry of it to the A-site and thereby induces a peptidyl-tRNA slippage (and B). Therefore, we suspected that in the cases below where we observed an effect on the frequency of frameshifting in the modification deficient mutants, it would primarily be due to an A-site effect, i.e. slow entry of the ternary complex containing aminoacyl-tRNA cognate to the test codon allowing a peptidyl-tRNA interacting with the slippery codon XXX to slip (and B). In the constructs used, all have a UAG stop codon just after the test codon NNN (i.e. the sequence is in zero frame -XXX-NNN-UAG). Translational termination in yeast is controlled by two interacting protein chain release factors, eRF1 and eRF3. Whereas eRF1 recognizes all three stop codons, binds to ribosomal Asite, and promotes hydrolysis of the P-site located peptidyl-tRNA, eRF3 stimulates the termination activity of eRF1 (Reviewed in Kisselev and Buckingham (44)). A poor eRF1 binding to the UAG in the A-site may induce slippage by the modification deficient peptidyl-tRNA from cognate NNN codon to NN-U codon. Therefore, the +1 frameshifting observed using the luciferase assay may be caused by either an A-site or a P-site effect or both. Note that, in all these cases the error occurs in the P-site (either by the tRNA reading the slippery codon or a tRNA cognate to the test codon). Although the luciferase system used by us is unable to distinguish between an A-or a P-site effect caused by modification deficiency, it is still a valuable method to address whether or not modification is important for maintaining the reading frame. To address specifically if modification deficiency induces an A-or a P-site effect, we used the Ty1 system, which is explained below.

 = = = Role Of Xm 5 U Or Mcm 5 S 2 U Nucleosides In Reading Frame Maintenance = = =

 In yeast, there are 11 tRNA species having mcm 5 s 2 U 34, mcm 5 U 34, ncm 5 U 34 or ncm 5 U 34 m nucleosides at wobble position. The role of these modified uridines was analyzed for ribosomal +1 frameshifting using the Renilla/Firefly luciferase bicistronic reporter system described in the previous section.

In an elp3 mutant these tRNA species are missing the ncm 5 and mcm 5 groups at wobble position (U 34). The role of the ncm 5 and mcm 5 groups present in these tRNAs in reading frame maintenance was investigated in a wild type and in an elp3 mutant strain using cognate or near cognate codons as test codons. Lack of the mcm 5 side chain in tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU, tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC, tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU and tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC resulted in significantly higher levels of +1 frameshifting with either A-ending cognate or G-ending near cognate codons (and Supplementary). However, absence of the mcm 5 group in tRNA Gln mcm 5 s 2 UUG did not have any significant effect on reading frame maintenance for the Gln codons CAA or CAG (). Lack of the ncm 5 group of U 34 in tRNA Val ncm 5 UAC and tRNA Ser ncm 5 UGA resulted in an increased level of +1 frameshifting with near cognate Val codon GUG or cognate Ser codon UCA. In contrast, absence of the ncm 5 group of U 34 in tRNA Pro ncm 5 UGG resulted in a decreased level of +1 frameshifting with near cognate Pro codon CCG. Lack of the ncm 5 group of U 34 of the remaining tRNAs did not cause a significant difference in levels of +1 frameshifting (and Supplementary). We conclude that in the xm 5 U and mcm 5 s 2 U tRNA isoacceptors, the mcm 5 group plays a more vital role than the ncm 5 group in reading frame maintenance.

Codon CCC that can be read by ncm 5 U 34 containing tRNA Pro ncm 5 UGG is used as a slippery codon upstream next to Gln-, Lys, Arg-, Gly-and Thr-test codons and Supplementary). Thus, the ncm 5 U 34 present in the potential peptidyl-Pro-tRNA might influence the ribosomal grip in the P-site and thus influence the slippage. To test directly the influence of the ncm 5 group in Pro-tRNA in peptidyl-Pro-tRNA slippage, we used a construct -UUU-CCC-UAG-in the luciferase system. The stop codon UAG is in the zero frame just after the Pro codon CCC. Since eukaryotic release factor 1 (eRF1) acts in the A-site (Reviewed in Kisselev and Buckingham (44)) a possible +1 frameshift by Pro-tRNA lacking ncm 5 U would occur in the P-site. However, no significant +1 frameshifting was observed when the CCC codon was just upstream the stop codon and thus in the P-site and Supplementary). We conclude that the ncm 5 group in Pro-tRNA does not increase peptidyl-tRNA slippage at the slippery codon CCC.

The slippery codon GGG is decoded by both C 34 containing tRNA Gly CCC and mcm 5 U 34 containing tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC. The structure of the latter tRNA is affected by the elp3 mutation and this tRNA reads the GGG codon very inefficiently compared to the cognate tRNA Gly CCC. Therefore, in the elp3 mutant it is not likely that tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC lack-. Influence of tRNA modifications mcm 5 s 2 U 34, mcm 5 U 34, ncm 5 U 34 and ncm 5 U 34m on reading frame maintenance based on data using the Renilla/Firefly luciferase bicistronic reporter system a Bold indicate significant difference in frameshifting levels between indicated mutant and wild type as determined by two-tail t-test. (*) indicates P < 0.05 and (**) indicates P < 0.01. b tRNA Tyr G A has an unmodified G nucleoside at wobble position and its structure is not affected by the elp3, trm9 or tuc1 mutations, thus it is used as a negative control. c In an elp3 mutant, levels of s 2 group is reduced. d In a trm9 mutant, tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU and tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC contain a mixture of ncm 5 U/cm 5 U and ncm 5 s 2 U/cm 5 s 2 U nucleosides, respectively (53). n.a., not applicable.

ing the mcm 5 side chain at U 34 will out-compete the efficiently decoding cognate tRNA Gly CCC at GGG codons. Consequently, the observed +1 frameshifting for tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC and tRNA Val ncm 5 UAC is most likely not caused by slippage of an unmodified peptidyl-tRNA Gly mcm 5 UCC but rather a poor A-site entry by tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC and tRNA Val ncm 5 UAC, respectively.

The formation of the esterified methyl group of mcm 5 U, which is the last step in the synthesis of the mcm 5 side chain, is catalyzed by the dimeric Trm9/Trm112 protein complex.

The influence of the esterified methyl group of the mcm 5 U 34 and mcm 5 s 2 U 34 nucleoside in reading frame maintenance was investigated in a wild type and in a trm9 mutant strain using cognate or near cognate codons as test codons (. Lack of the esterified methyl group of the mcm 5 side chain of U 34 in tRNA Gln mcm 5 s 2 UUG resulted in significantly decreased +1 frameshifting at the Gln codon CAA and Supplementary). There were no significant differences in the levels of frameshifting between wild type and trm9 mutant in the remaining test constructs and Supplementary). We conclude that presence or absence of the esterified methyl group in the mcm 5 side chain only seem to play a minor role in +1 frameshifting.

In a tuc1 mutant, the s 2 group of mcm 5 s 2 U at the wobble position (U 34) is absent in tRNA Gln mcm 5 s 2 UUG, tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU and tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC. The role of the s 2 group present in these tRNAs in reading frame maintenance was investigated in a wild type and a tuc1 mutant strain using cognate or near cognate codons as test codons (. Absence of the s 2 group in tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU and tRNA Glu mcm 5 s 2 UUC resulted in significantly higher levels of +1 frameshifting with either A-ending cognate or G-ending near cognate codons (and Supplementary). However, lack of the s 2 group in tRNA Gln mcm 5 s 2 UUG resulted in significantly decreased +1 frameshifting with the near cognate CAG (and Supplementary).

In the cases stated above, Gln-and Pro-tRNAs showed reduced levels of +1 frameshifting due to lack of esterified methyl, s 2 or ncm 5 groups). This reduced level of frameshifting might be surprising but similar observations were noted earlier. In bacteria the Gln-, Lys-and Glu-tRNA contain as wobble nucleoside the mnm 5 s 2 U, which is structurally related to the mcm 5 s 2 U present in the corresponding yeast tRNAs. Lack of either the mnm 5 side chain or the sulphur at position 2 reduced frameshifting similarly as noted by us for the two aforementioned cases. Although these results seems counterintuitively strange, one has to remember that the structure of the different tRNA species is optimized and in fact has evolved to have similar decoding activity, which is obtained partly due to modification of it. Therefore, a modification may improve the activity of one tRNA whereas it might reduce the activity of another tRNA species (See discussion of this issue in Björk and Hagervall (4)). From such considerations, one would expect that when measuring a specific activity of a tRNA, like influencing reading frame maintenance, a modification might improve or reduce the fidelity of it.

 = = = The Frameshifting Error Occurs By Peptidyl-Trna Slippage = = =

 A key feature of the peptidyl-tRNA slippage model is that the error in reading frame maintenance, induced either by an A-or a P-site effect due to modification deficient tRNA, occurs in the P-site by peptidyl-tRNA slippage. There are two ways to establish if the frameshift errors occur in the ribosomal A-or P-site. Either one determines the amino acid sequence of the frameshift peptide covering the frameshift window or by overexpressing the tRNA cognate to the Asite codon. In the latter case, if the frameshift error occurs due to an A-site effect, such overexpression would decrease the frameshift error, since it reduces the ribosomal pause and thereby reduces the ability of the peptidyl-tRNA to slip forward. We chose the latter method, since this approach is relevant for this study, as such a treatment also suppresses all the pleiotropic phenotypes induced by a mutation in, e.g. the ELP3 gene. Thus, the strong pleiotropic phenotypes ob-served in an elp3 mutant might be due, at least partly, to errors in reading frame maintenance of some key mRNAs.

As stated in the description of the assay system, the dual-luciferase assay system is not designed to clarify the difference between an A-or a P-site effect caused by modification deficiency, we decided to use Ty1 assay system to address this question. The expression of the TYB gene of yeast Ty retrotransposon requires a ribosomal +1 frameshift event caused by a peptidyl-tRNA slippage. Only a seven nucleotide sequence CUU-AGG-C is required for the +1 frameshift event to occur and thus only two tRNA species--tRNA Leu UAG and tRNA Arg CCU --are participating in this event. In the yeast strain used, the availability of tRNA Arg CCU is low resulting in a low rate of ribosomal A-site selection, which induces a slippage by tRNA Leu UAG at the CUU P-site codon into the +1 frame (UU-A). Therefore, we decided to use an altered version of the Ty1 +1 frameshift system to study whether or not the +1 frameshifting caused by lack of the mcm 5 side chain in the R-luc-F-luc system, is due to a peptidyl-tRNA slippage. We altered the 'CUU-AGG-C' +1 frameshift site by changing the Arg codon (AGG) into either a Lys codon AAA decoded by tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU or an Arg codon AGA decoded by tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU to test whether or not lack of mcm 5 side chain of these tRNAs induce +1 frameshifting (). If the hypomodified tRNA is inefficiently accepted to the A-site in an elp3 mutant, the AAA (Lys) and/or AGA (Arg) test codons will act similarly as codons decoded by the low available tRNA Arg CCU resulting in a slow entry to the A-site by the ternary complex containing the unmodified tRNA. If so, the tRNA Leu UAG in the P-site will slip into the +1 frame (from cognate CUU to non-cognate UU-A). All alterations of the Ty1 sequence were made in the HIS4A::lacZ frameshift reporter plasmid (see Materials and Methods) (). The levels of frameshifting were calculated by dividing the ␤-galactosidase values generated from the test construct with the values from the in-frame control construct. shows that for the 'CUU-AAA-C' Lys codon test construct, lack of mcm 5 side group in the mcm 5 s 2 U nucleoside of tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU resulted in 10-fold increased +1 frameshifting in the elp3 mutant compared to wild type. In contrast, for the 'CUU-AGA-C' Arg codon test construct, lack of mcm 5 side group in tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU did not increase frameshifting in the elp3 mutant compared to the wild type (). Thus, similar to the results obtained by the luciferase system lack of the mcm 5 group of tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU induced increased +1 frameshifting. Although we observed an increased frameshifting for mcm 5 deficient tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU in the luciferase assay system (Table 2), this was not the case using the Ty1 assay system ().

To analyze whether lack of the mcm 5 group of tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU could induce +1 frameshifting due to a Psite effect by modification deficiency, we placed a Lys codon AAA instead of the CUU codon in the Ty1 assay system and varied the following codon. The concentration of a tRNA species is proportional to the number of the corre-sponding tRNA genes in the yeast genome. Accordingly, by placing different codons in the A-site, the concentration of the corresponding tRNAs in the cell reading this codon is changed and thereby the efficiency of reading the A-site codon is altered. Thus, to test for a possible P-site effect induced by a lack of the mcm 5 group of mcm 5 s 2 U in Lys-tRNA we placed an Arg codon AGG read by the rare cognate tRNA Arg CCU (1 genomic copy) and the near cognate tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU (11 genomic copies) after the Lys codon AAA. In an elp3 mutant tRNA Arg CCU is essential, demonstrating that mcm 5 group of the near cognate Arg-tRNA is required for efficient reading of the Arg codon AGG. Therefore, in an elp3 mutant, a situation is generated where the AGG codon is read slowly since it is read mainly by the rare cognate tRNA Arg CCU and inefficiently by the more abundant modification deficient near cognate tRNA Arg mcm 5 UCU. Such a condition would allow tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU at the Psite to slip to the +1 translational frame. Furthermore, we made test constructs to increase the rate of A-site selection by introducing either an Ile codon AUU decoded by cognate tRNA Ile AAU present in 13 genomic copies or an Arg codon CGU decoded by cognate tRNA Arg ACG present in 6 genomic copies after Lys codon AAA. By varying concentration of the potential A-site coding tRNAs from 1 genomic copy to 13 genomic copies, we did not observe any significant difference in the levels of +1 frameshifting between wild type and elp3 mutant. Apparently, the possible peptidyl-tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU slippage is not sensitive to the rate of A-site selection suggesting that lack of mcm 5 s 2 U does not cause any P-site effect and thus an increased peptidyl-tRNA slippage.

If the frameshifting event occurring at the modified Ty1 site 'CUU-AAA-C' was caused by a slow entry of the ternary complex containing the hypomodified tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU causing a peptidyl-tRNA Leu UAG slippage to +1 translational frame, an elevated level of the hypomod-ified tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU should increase the rate of A-site selection and thereby reducing +1 frameshifting (. We therefore cloned the tK(UUU)L gene, which encodes tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU into either plasmid pMB38-9merWT (test construct, containing the CUU-AAA-C frameshift site) and pMB38-9merFF (corresponding in-frame control construct, and). Thus, the plasmids harbor both the tRNA gene and the ␤galactosidase gene with either a frameshift site or an inframe control. The plasmid encoded tK(UUU)L gene results in overexpression of tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU and concomitantly reduced the levels of +1 frameshifting in the elp3 mutant from 10-to 3-fold compared to wild type (). This data strongly suggest that the +1 frameshifting event at 'CUU-AAA-C' Lys codon test construct occurs by peptidyl-tRNA Leu UAG slippage due to an A-site effect caused by a slow entry of the hypomodified tRNA Lys mcm 5 s 2 UUU. As was suggested earlier by us and confirmed by, the major function of the mcm 5 s 2 U 34 nucleoside in Lys-tRNA is to improve the reading of the cognate codon. Thus, mcm 5 s 2 U 34 deficiency results in slow decoding and reduced translation elongation rate but also, as shown here, induces +1 frameshifting by reducing the rate of A-site selection.

 = = = Conclusion = = =

 Among the tRNA isoacceptors having xm 5 U 34 or xm 5 s 2 U 34 wobble uridine nucleosides, only Lys-and Gln-tRNAs has been investigated for +1 frameshifting in both bacteria and yeast. The modified wobble nucleoside 5-methoxycarbonylmethyl-2-thiouridine (mcm 5 s 2 U 34) present in yeast tRNAs specific for Gln, Lys and Glu has a chemically related form, 5-methylaminomethyl-2thiouridine (mnm 5 s 2 U 34) present in the corresponding bacterial tRNAs. In bacteria, lack of the mnm 5 group in Gln-tRNA results in increased +1 frameshifting at both cognate (CAA) and near cognate (CAG) codons, whereas absence of the s 2 group results in +1 frameshifting only at the cognate (CAA) codon. In contrast, lack of mcm 5 or s 2 groups in yeast Gln-tRNA does not result in increased +1 frameshifting at either CAA or CAG codons. Instead, absence of the s 2 group results in reduced +1 frameshifting at the CAG codon. In bacteria, lack of mnm 5 or s 2 groups in Lys-tRNA cause increased +1 frameshifting at both cognate (AAA) and near cognate (AAG) codons by A-and P-site effects. In yeast, we also observed an increased +1 frameshifting due to lack of mcm 5 or s 2 groups of Lys-tRNA at AAA and AAG codons. However, we show that +1 frameshifting at the cognate (AAA) codon is induced by an A-site effect, not a P-site effect.

It has been shown that presence of modified nucleosides in tRNAs are required for tuning the decoding activity in order to maintain uniformity in translation. An in vitro study in yeast showed that presence of the mcm 5 and s 2 groups of Lys-tRNA are required for efficient A-site binding. Consistent with these observations, our in vivo studies show that presence of the mcm 5 group of Lys-tRNA promotes its entry to ribosomal A-site and thereby avoids +1 frameshift errors. Thus, wobble uridine modifications are required to optimize the function of tRNAs and thereby promote a proper reading frame maintenance.

 = = = Supplementary Data = = =

 Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.


 = = Viruses Griffithsin: An Antiviral Lectin With Outstanding Therapeutic Potential = =

 = = = Introduction = = =

 A number of life-threatening human diseases are caused by viruses as diverse as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Ebola, yellow fever, Zika, influenza, and severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle East respiratory syndrome corona viruses (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, respectively). Though these viruses are taxonomically and genetically distinct, they are all enveloped viruses and therefore possess a lipid bilayer that protects the viral capsid and genetic material that is inside the viral particle. Despite the efforts to eradicate these diseases, a number of them continue to affect us either as pandemic diseases or as outbreaks that appear from time to time. For example, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), by the end of 2015 there were nearly 37 million people infected with HIV, with two million new cases and about one million deaths occurring that year (http://www.who.int/). On the other hand, nearly 29,000 cases and over 11,000 deaths were reported during the most recent Ebola outbreak that started in 2014. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV belong to the corona virus family that includes the common cold. Outbreaks of both viruses (SARS-CoV in Asia in 2003 and MERS-CoV in Saudi Arabia in 2012) led to several thousand cases of SARS and MERS, and hundreds of deaths. Efforts to create vaccines against these viral diseases have been successful in some cases such as yellow fever, but other cases like HIV have been more challenging.

Enveloped viruses have surface glycoproteins that mediate attachment and fusion with the target cell membrane. These proteins constitute the first encounter with the host and the most exposed target that the immune system can attack; hence viruses have evolved to hide the features that would make them more susceptible to antibody neutralization. These strategies include hiding fundamental structural motifs through oligomerization or conformational occlusion, rapid mutation rates that lead to high sequence variability in non-essential regions such as variable loops, and extensive posttranslational glycosylation. Vaccine development against enveloped viruses has mostly focused on targeting the envelope glycoproteins primarily because they are the sole targets of neutralizing antibodies. Some viruses, including hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HIV, have thus far eluded vaccine efforts, mostly due to the high variability among strains, high mutation rates within a given virus, and physical masking of neutralizing epitopes. Development of vaccines against diseases that appear as outbreaks, such as Ebola and SARS-CoV, are also challenging because of the lack of infected patient populations necessary for testing efficacy of vaccines and therapeutics. Other diseases such as yellow fever can be prevented by vaccination.

For those diseases in which vaccine development has been challenging, other therapies have nevertheless been developed. HIV is arguably the most studied viral disease; highly-active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) consisting of a combination of small molecule antiretroviral drugs has progressively improved the lives of patients in some parts of the world, and effectively extends life expectancy. Antiretroviral drugs target different proteins and enzymes essential for the virus life cycle. On the other hand, antibody therapeutics are emerging as powerful alternative forms of therapy against HIV and other diseases. Such therapies depend on isolation of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies, primarily from patient sera, that will bind specifically to the envelope glycoprotein of the virus. Another way to treat viral diseases that is currently being studied is through the use of proteins capable of targeting the glycans present on the surface of the envelope glycoproteins, namely, lectins. Lectins are sugar-binding proteins that are ubiquitous, present in microorganisms, plants and animals. They participate in many important cellular processes including cell-cell interactions and protein folding. Some lectins provide protection to the host from other organisms. Lectins have been developed widely as probes to investigate cell surface structure and functions; they have also found applications as antiviral drugs and in the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents. A number of lectins capable of binding the high-mannose glycans commonly found in the surface of the envelope glycoproteins are currently under study to be used as microbicides. Some of the most promising antiviral lectins include griffithsin (GRFT), cyanovirin (CV-N) and banana lectin (BanLec). Their use has been mostly suggested as antiviral microbicides, acting as a barrier to prevent transmission of HIV through their incorporation into vaginal and rectal gels, creams or suppositories. In such systems, they can bind the viruses and prevent viral entry and fusion to target cells, thereby preventing infection. This review summarizes the activity, biochemical, biophysical and structural data available for GRFT, one of the most potent anti-HIV agents reported to date.

 = = = Discovery And Recombinant Expression Of Griffithsin = = =

 Griffithsin was discovered as an anti-HIV lead by researchers at the National Cancer Institute (NCI). GRFT was isolated from a marine red alga Griffithsia sp. present in the NCI Natural Products Repository. Mass spectroscopic and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data indicated the active compound was a protein rather than a small molecule natural product. Its sequence was determined through a combination of N-terminal Edman degradation of the intact protein and N-terminal sequencing of peptide fragments obtained from endopeptidase and cyanogen bromide treatments. The wild-type protein from the alga contained an uncommon amino acid of 151.05 Da at position 31 that was replaced by alanine (Ala) in recombinant protein preparations without affecting anti-HIV activity. GRFT has no homology to any other proteins previously reported. It has been shown to have anti-HIV activity against T cell tropic and macrophage-tropic viruses. It is capable of inhibiting cell-cell fusion between chronically infected and uninfected cells and its efficacy as an antiviral agent against other enveloped viruses has also been shown (see.

A large-scale expression system is essential for the development of GRFT as an affordable drug. To that end GRFT has been expressed recombinantly in different organisms. It was first expressed recombinantly in Escherichia coli (E. coli) with a polyhistidine tag on the N-terminus to facilitate purification by metal affinity chromatography. Expression of GRFT in Nicotiana benthamiana using an infectious tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)-based vector has yielded gram amounts of the protein. Expression in rice seeds through the stable transformation of plants has also been reported. Purification of GRFT has been also optimized, including the use of ceramic filtration followed by two-stage chromatography, and a combination of heat, magnesium chloride and bentonite, followed by a single chromatographic step. Importantly, GRFT expression and purification has been proven robust, an essential feature in making a drug available for clinical testing.

 = = = Three-Dimensional Structure = = =

 Griffithsin exists as a stable homodimer where each subunit contains 121 amino acids (). It has no cysteines in its sequence and no homology to any other proteins. Structures of GRFT in the absence of any ligand as well as in the presence of different monosaccharides and disaccharides have been solved by X-ray crystallography. GRFT folds into a domain-swapped dimer (, where each subunit presents nearly perfect internal three-fold symmetry. The structure is composed by three repeats of an antiparallel four-stranded β-sheet that superficially resembles a β-prism-I motif found in other lectins of the jacalin family. Two out of 12 β-strands (16 amino acids) swap from one monomer to the other to form a β-prism of three four-stranded sheets. Each subunit of the homodimer griffithsin is capable of binding three monosaccharides. Each binding site is located in an equilateral triangle, with each site separated by approximately 15 Å (). Crystal structures with the monosaccharides mannose, glucose and N-acetylglycosamine, and the disaccharides 1-6α-mannobiose and maltose have been reported. When interacting with oligosaccharides, it has been shown that GRFT preferentially interacts with the terminal sugar. Crystals with mannose have shown that all binding sites are almost identical and each one contains an aspartic acid (Asp) residue that makes extensive contacts with the sugar. These include Asp30, Asp70 and Asp112 that make hydrogen bonding interactions with O5 and O6 of mannose (). Mutations of these residues to Ala don't affect the folding of the protein but weaken the binding to a mannose column.

Attempts to crystalize GRFT with oligosaccharides have been mostly unsuccessful because of extensive precipitation of the protein in the presence of the oligosaccharides. This problem was solved by Moulaei et al. who were able to create a monomeric version of GRFT (mGRFT) by insertion of a short linker, Gly-Ser, that separates the β-strands that undergo intermolecular domain swapping. A second mutation, leucine in position 2 to serine, was introduced to minimize the hydrophobic patch opposite to the swap region. A complex of mGRFT bound to a synthetic nonamannoside (Man9) that contains the nine mannose residues present in full-length mannonanose-di-(N-acetyl-D-glucosamine) (Man9GlcNAc2) but lacks the core. In that structure, they found two of the three arms of nonamannoside bound to two of the three mannose-binding sites (). In particular, the terminal mannose units on the D2 and D1 arms were bound to sites 1 and 3 (as defined in ref), respectively. The third mannose-binding site, site 2, is occupied by the D2 arm of another nonamannoside in what likely is a more transient interaction. This interaction was inconsistent with the model proposed by Ziókowska et al. where it was proposed that all three arms of Man 9 GlcNAc 2 could interact with GRFT with a one-to-one stoichiometry. In addition to the crystal structures, NMR assignments for the backbone atoms of GRFT in the absence of ligand and in the presence of mannose have been reported. The crystal structures of GRFT:mannoside complexes suggested the importance of Asp residues present in each of the three mannose binding sites. Single mutations of any one of the Asp residues to Ala slightly weaken the affinity of binding to HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120. However, the single mutations significantly decrease the potency in inhibition in single round HIV infection and cytopathicity assays as well as cell-to-cell transmission assays (cocultivation assays). To further study the importance of having three binding sites on each monomer, Xue et al. designed a series of mutants where two monomers connected by an amino acid linker were expressed to form an obligate dimer. They compared a construct having all six binding sites (three from each monomer), with a mutant where three of the binding sites in one of the subunits were mutated to abolish binding to mannose (one-arm obligate dimer) and another mutant in which all six mannose binding sites were mutated. Binding studies showed that the obligate dimer as well as the construct containing mannose binding sites on only one subunit bound to gp120 with comparable affinities, whereas the mutant lacking all mannose binding sites did not bind gp120. In contrast, neutralization assays showed that the anti-HIV activity of the one-arm obligate dimer was reduced by several orders of magnitude compared to the wild-type obligate dimer.

Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) showed that binding to mono-and disaccharides is exothermic and entropically favored with micromolar K D values. Enthalpies among different saccharides indicated favorable electrostatic contacts. Large changes in entropy were reasoned by large displacement of water molecules from the binding sites. Interestingly, nonamannoside binding was largely enthalpically driven and entropically unfavorable, indicating the formation of more favorable contacts between the sugar and the protein. The unfavorable entropy of binding indicated that the multivalent interactions between GRFT and nonamannoside diminished the degrees of freedom of glycan and protein [.

 = = = Peptides Derived From Grft = = =

 Using the structure and carbohydrate binding arrangement of GRFT, Micewicz et al. constructed a peptide, grifonin-1 (GRFN-1), that contained three covalently linked beta sheets and displayed three-fold symmetry. Grifonin-1 inhibited laboratory strains of HIV and bound to viral glycoproteins. Though antiviral potency was reduced by many hundred-fold compared to GRFT, grifonin-1 nevertheless exhibited submicromolar half maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC 50 s) in single-round HIV infectivity assays.

 = = = Grft-C37 = = =

 To enhance the ability of GRFT to inhibit HIV infection, Kagiampkis et al. created a covalently linked fusion protein composed of GRFT and the known HIV entry inhibitor C37. C37 is a 37-amino acid peptide containing sequences from the C-terminal region of the HIV transmembrane protein gp41. C37 blocks HIV fusion by binding to the N-terminal helices of gp41 and preventing the formation of the six-helix bundle that leads to membrane fusion. The fusion constructs demonstrated 5-8-fold improvements in potency compared to GRFT alone in C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5)-tropic or C-X-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CXCR5)-tropic cell-cell fusion assays and single-round infection assays.

 = = = Tandemers = = =

 Following on their work with monomeric GRFT, Moulaei and co-workers created several GRFT tandemers. The tandemer proteins were constructed by linking GRFT monomers to one another through covalent linkages formed by insertion of Gly-Thr-Gly linkers. The tandemers were analyzed by electron microscopy that showed the double and triple repeats to exist in a linear arrangement while the tandemer containing four mGRFT repeats formed a more globular structure. In HIV neutralization assays, improvements in potency were observed for the double and triple tandemers but potency plateaued there, with no increase in potency observed for the 4× mGRFT construct.

 = = = Grft Stability = = =

 GRFT is an unusually stable protein, withstanding extraction procedures used in natural products' isolation and purification. These may include exposure to organic solvents and repeated lyophilization. In addition to this physicochemical stability, its resistance to protease degradation was established in a study examining the stability of antimicrobial peptides. There, the authors showed that GRFT was resistant to digestion by eight out of nine different proteases and was degraded only by the metalloprotease elastase. In addition, GRFT was not affected under bacterial degradation conditions.

 = = = Carbohydrate-Mediated Crosslinking = = =

 The importance of intermolecular crosslinking by GRFT has been suggested in several publications. Evidence has been obtained from the protein perspective as well as from the glycan perspective. It has been shown that monomeric GRFT binds with comparable affinity to gp120, yet the IC 50 for neutralization is several orders of magnitude weaker than wild-type GRFT. Crystal structures with a synthetic nonamannoside have been obtained only for the monomeric GRFT construct. The mode of binding seen in the crystals was in disagreement with a model proposing all three terminal mannose units of Man 9 interacting with each of the mannose-binding sites in GRFT. The inability of Man 9 to engage all three binding sites on GRFT was further supported by studies that showed that glycopeptides that mimic Man 9 required distances greater than those separating the arms of natural Man 9 GlcNAc 2 in order to engage all three binding sites simultaneously [. Most recently, cryo-electron microscopy and surface plasmon resonance studies of viral particles treated with GRFT or GRFT mutants demonstrated that the unique combination of multivalency, strict recognition of Man 9 and homodimeric structure of GRFT led to bridging of viral particles and aggregation.

The ability of monomeric GRFT tandemers, linked together by Gly-Thr-Gly amino acid linkers, showed that two individual monomeric units were needed to recover (and improve by up to 5-fold) the potency of wild-type GRFT. Three units of mGRFT improved the neutralization potential even further (5-fold more). However, no further improvements in potency were observed for tandemers containing a greater number of mGRFT domains. Interestingly, dynamic light scattering showed that wild-type GRFT causes virus aggregation, however, monomeric GRFT as well as the mGRFT tandemers did not cause virus aggregation; in addition, cryo-electron microscopy showed that viruses exposed to wild-type GRFT had protein aggregates on their surface but immunostaining was not performed.

 = = = Antiviral Activity = = =

 GRFT has been shown to have antiviral activity against a number of enveloped viruses as described in this section. Though the predicted number of glycans varies considerably among the viruses inhibited by GRFT, antiviral activity has nonetheless been attributed to carbohydrate-mediated binding to the respective viral envelope glycoproteins. A list of effective concentrations to inhibit 50% of virus infection (EC 50) is presented in, with HIV being the most studied target. Native GRFT HIV-1RF CEM-SS 0.043 Recombinant GRFT HIV-1RF CEM-SS 0.039 Native GRFT HIV-1RoJo PBMC 0.63 Native GRFT HIV-1ADA Macrophage 0.5 Native GRFT HIV-1Ba-L Macrophage 0.098 Recombinant GRFT HIV-1Ba-L PMBC 0.01 Recombinant GRFT HIV-1LAI MT-4 0.01 Recombinant GRFT HIV-2ROD MT-4 0.17 Recombinant GRFT SIV mac251 CEMx174 0.35 Recombinant. These synapses are formed when high amounts gp120 present on the surface of HIV-infected cells bind the CD4 receptors on uninfected CD4 + cells. This interaction triggers the same conformational changes needed for further co-receptor binding, followed by gp41 mediated membrane fusion.

 = = = Hiv Can Infect Cluster Of Differentiation 4 Positive (Cd4) + Target Cells That Include T Cells, Macrophages And Dendritic Cells (Dc). Hiv Infection Can Occur Cell-Free Via Infection By Hiv Particles Or By Cell-Cell Contact Between Hiv-1 Infected T Cells Or Dendritic Cells And Non-Infected Cd4 + Target T Cells At A Virological Synapse = = =

 It has been shown that GRFT is capable of inhibiting in vitro infection of clade A, B and C viruses, with clade A being the least sensitive to GRFT. Additionally, it was shown that the sensitivity to inhibition was highly dependent on the number of glycans on the surface of a gp120. It has been shown that single-cycle pseudotypes (TZM-bl cell neutralization assay) are generally more sensitive than neutralization in PMBC assays. GRFT has been shown to inhibit the fusion between HIV-1 infected T cells and non-infected CD4 + T cells. GRFT is also capable of preventing infection on cervical explants and cell-to-cell transmission on migratory cells from such explants. Thus, GRFT has the ability to block HIV infection in numerous assays and platforms.

Interestingly, even though the monomeric GRFT had comparable affinity towards nonamannoside, it showed decreased ability to bind to gp120 and even more dramatic decrease in inhibiting HIV infection in CEM-SS cells. This indicates that crosslinking of multiple high-mannose sugars is responsible for the high potency of the lectin GRFT.

HIV transmission is believed to be mediated predominantly by transmitted/founder (T/F) viruses. These viruses show differential glycosylation when compared with chronic viruses. The effect of GRFT on T/F viruses has been measured and it has been found that there is a great variability on the IC 50 values for GRFT against T/F viruses. Interestingly, even though there was no correlation between the number of possible N-linked glycosylation sites and the sensitivity to GRFT for T/F viruses, there seemed to be a correlation between the number and location of high-mannose glycan sites and the resistance to GRFT. Lastly, it has been shown that GRFT can block HIV-2 replication in MT-4 cell cultures with EC 50 values in the sub-nanomolar range.

 = = = Mode Of Action = = =

 Binding to HIV-1 Envelope Glycoprotein gp120 GRFT has been shown to bind the HIV envelope glycoproteins thereby blocking CD4 binding as well as binding of other anti-HIV antibodies. These include the conformation-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) 48d that binds to the CD4-induced epitope on gp120, and the carbohydrate-specific mAb 2G12. Interestingly, binding of the lectin cyanovirin-N (CV-N) to gp120 was shown to inhibit subsequent binding of GRFT; in contrast, GRFT binding to gp120 does not block subsequent binding by CV-N. This could suggest that GRFT has a smaller recognition epitope, or lower stoichiometry of binding compared to CV-N. However, ITC experiments showed that a total of approximately 10 GRFT units are capable of binding to a single gp120 glycoprotein. In regard to timing of inhibition, GRFT has been shown to initiate antiviral activity immediately upon contact with HIV-1. This represents an advantage when compared with other antiretroviral agents, such as the nucleoside phosphonate (R)-9-(2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)adenine (PMPA) that must be administered as a prodrug ester.

 = = = Effects Of Grft On Cd4 And Co-Receptor-Binding Sites = = =

 It has been shown that GRFT competes with the glycan-specific antibody 2G12, a mAb that binds the high mannose patch on gp120, but enhances binding of antibodies specific for the CD4 binding site (CD4bs) including mAbs b12 and b6 and the chimeric molecule CD4-IgG2. mAb b12 is a broadly neutralizing antibody whereas mAb b6 is non-neutralizing. CD4-IgG2 is fusion protein used as a surrogate of CD4 where the variable region of an IgG2 molecule has been replaced with the soluble region of the CD4 receptor. Deletion of the glycan in position 386 decreases the GRFT-mediated increase in b12 binding. This data was supported by the observation that GRFT and mAb b12 act synergistically and that the deletion of the glycan at asparagine (Asn) 386 prevents the synergistic effect.

In contrast with the enhancement of binding to the CD4 binding site, it was shown that GRFT inhibits binding to the co-receptor binding site-specific mAb 17b without directly occluding the binding site. show that the binding of GRFT to the glycans on gp120 likely interferes with the CD4-induced conformational changes needed for co-receptor binding. Another study showed that the presence of GRFT partially inhibits the binding of CD4-IgG2, the CD4-binding site mAbs b12 and VRC01 and the CD4-induced epitope mAb 17b in the presence or absence of soluble CD4 (sCD4), suggesting that the presence of GRFT might compromise the exposure of the CD4 binding site.

To further investigate the effect of GRFT on exposing the CD4bs, Xue et al. showed that all six mannose-binding sites were needed to expose this site, as mutants lacking mannose-binding sites on one domain did not show CD4bs exposure. They further showed that binding of GRFT to gp120 induces shedding, and this effect is more marked for clade B strains than clade C.

 = = = Inhibition Of Dc-Sign Binding = = =

 Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells responsible for capture and degradation of pathogens that enter the mucosal environment. DCs also play an important role in viral transmission. DC cells present a DC-SIGN (dendritic cell intercellular adhesion molecule 3 (ICAM-3) grabbing non-integrin) receptor on their surface. DCs migrate to the lymph nodes where the DC-SIGN receptor mediates the transmission to naïve uninfected CD4 + T cells. It is believed that the interaction of HIV-1 with dendritic cells through the DC-SIGN receptor mediates the transfer of HIV-1 to the lymph nodes where it infects CD4 + T cells. The DC-SIGN mediated transfer of HIV to target cells involves binding of the virus to the DC-SIGN receptor, a process that occurs through interactions between high-mannose glycans on the surface of the envelope glycoprotein with DC-SIGN, followed by transfer to CD4 + target cells for infection. GRFT has been shown to inhibit both processes. In addition, single-site mutations on the mannose-binding site of GRFT have been shown to significantly diminish DC-SIGN associated cell-to-cell transmission. Competition assays have shown that GRFT inhibits the binding of DC-SIGN to gp120. GRFT is not cytotoxic to DCs and does not trigger DC apoptosis or maturation.

 = = = Hiv Resistance = = =

 Several excellent studies investigating mechanisms of GRFT resistance in HIV have been published. Not surprisingly, one strategy used by HIV against all lectins as well as glycan-targeting mAbs involves deletion of glycosylation sites). Alexandre et al. performed an extensive analysis comparing the IC 50 values of observed for GRFT against numerous HIV-1 subtype A and B strains, with the glycosylation of naturally-occurring viruses. Their results showed that viruses missing glycosylation at both Asn 234 and 295 sites were~20-100× less sensitive to GRFT. However, the absence of just one of these glycosylation sites did not affect the sensitivity. In addition, the number of missing glycans did not correlate with sensitivity to GRFT, but the location of glycosylation sites had a clear effect on efficacy. Huang et al. on the other hand investigated the role of glycans at Asn 295 and 448 in the background of a subtype C HIV strain MWS2. Mutants with a single deletion in either of these two glycosylation sites showed decreased susceptibility to GRFT (20-100× less sensitive), and double mutants showed an even more pronounced decrease in GRFT sensitivity. In a different study, strains lacking the glycan in position 295 showed lower sensitivity to GRFT and strains missing glycans 234 and 295 significantly reduced sensitivity. In a separate study, the Morris and Moore laboratories examined the mechanisms of resistance of an HIV-1 subtype C strain to lectins including GRFT. They found that viruses cultured in the presence of increasing concentrations of GRFT evolved deletions of several glycans including those in positions 339, 230, 234, 241, 298, 392 and 448. Insertion and deletion of amino acids near the glycosylation sites in the V4 loop of gp120 that would be expected to alter glycosylation were also observed. Importantly, when natural resistance evolves, these studies and others suggest that multiple glycosylation site mutations are required for a virus to become resistant to GRFT, and the level of resistance is only 3-10 fold compared to the wild type. In another study examining the effect of a different lectin, Oscillatoria agardhii agglutinin (OAA), GRFT-resistant HIV-1 IIIB strains were generated and resulted in deletions of glycans in positions 230, 234, 295 386 and 448, and these multiple mutations decreased GRFT susceptibility by more than 10,000 fold. Though studies examining corresponding effects of these glycosylation site deletions on viral fitness are limited, some studies report decreased infectivity in recombinant strains.

 = = = Synergy Studies = = =

 A number of laboratories have studied synergistic activities between GRFT and other proteins including antibodies and lectins as well as commonly used antivirals. The surface envelope glycoprotein gp120 and transmembrane protein gp41 are shown as yellow and gray surfaces, respectively. CD4 receptor and co-receptor binding sites are colored blue and purple, respectively. Glycans found to be deleted in resistance studies are colored red (glycans 234, 295, 339, 386, 392 and 448). Other glycans shown to be deleted in GRFT-resistant strains but not present in this structure include glycans 230, 241 and 298. Model was rendered with Pymol. Model was constructed by C. Soto, PDB Accession Number 5FYK and rendered with Pymol.

In a separate study, the Morris and Moore laboratories examined the mechanisms of resistance of an HIV-1 subtype C strain to lectins including GRFT. They found that viruses cultured in the presence of increasing concentrations of GRFT evolved deletions of several glycans including those in positions 339, 230, 234, 241, 298, 392 and 448. Insertion and deletion of amino acids near the glycosylation sites in the V4 loop of gp120 that would be expected to alter glycosylation were also observed. Importantly, when natural resistance evolves, these studies and others suggest that multiple glycosylation site mutations are required for a virus to become resistant to GRFT, and the level of resistance is only 3-10 fold compared to the wild type. In another study examining the effect of a different lectin, Oscillatoria agardhii agglutinin (OAA), GRFT-resistant HIV-1 IIIB strains were generated and resulted in deletions of glycans in positions 230, 234, 295 386 and 448, and these multiple mutations decreased GRFT susceptibility by more than 10,000 fold. Though studies examining corresponding effects of these glycosylation site deletions on viral fitness are limited, some studies report decreased infectivity in recombinant strains.

A number of laboratories have studied synergistic activities between GRFT and other proteins including antibodies and lectins as well as commonly used antivirals.

 = = = Antibodies = = =

 The monoclonal antibody 2G12 has been used in several studies because it recognizes a carbohydrate-dependent epitope comprising a cluster of high mannose glycans. These include glycans at Asn residues 332, 339 and 392, sites that are suggested to be targets of GRFT on the basis of resistance profiles. In competition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), capture of GRFT-treated virus by immobilized 2G12 showed these proteins to be competitive with one another. However, combinations of GRFT and 2G12 were shown to be synergistic against R5 HIV-1 strain BaL in PBMC cultures. In other studies, GRFT synergized with the CD4 binding site mAbs b12 and VRC01, with plasma from HIV-positive individuals, and with the anti-CCR5 antibody mAb PRO140. GRFT was also found to be synergistic with the soluble version of the CD4 receptor, sCD4.

 = = = Lectins = = =

 Owing to their potency and general potential as topical microbicides, numerous studies have looked at the effects of synergy between GRFT and other lectins, including mannan-binding lectin (MVN), banana lectin (BanLec), hippeastrum hybrid (amaryllis) lectin (HHA), and galanthus nivalis lectin (GNA) in virus infectivity assays. Synergy is more pronounced for some lectin resistant HIV-1 strains. BanLec has also shown to have additive effects with GRFT in cell-to-cell transmission assays. Interestingly, GRFT showed additive effects with OAA whereas it showed antagonism with the lectin hybrid OAA-homologous protein (OPA). As with the synergy studies employing GRFT and HIV-neutralizing antibodies, the type of assay may play a role in the observed outcome.

 = = = Tenofovir, Maraviroc And Enfuvitride = = =

 It has been shown that GRFT synergizes with known HIV-1 drugs, including the nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor tenofovir, the CCR5 HIV co-receptor antagonist maraviroc, the gp41 fusion inhibitor enfuvitride and the specific CXCR4 antagonist AMD3100 against using different HIV-1 clades in virus infectivity assays as well as cell-cell transmission assays. These drugs individually, or combined with other anti-HIV drugs, have been shown as promising candidates for microbicide development. Combinations of GRFT and these molecules are believed to have great potential in the development of microbicides [. Tenofovir has been shown to have a synergistic effect with GRFT against HIV-2.

 = = = Hepatitis C Virus (Hcv) = = =

 GRFT has been shown to inhibit infection of HCV to hepatocytes in vitro as well as cell-to-cell transmission. This has important clinical relevance because, following liver transplantation in HCV-infected patients, reinfection of the new liver graft commonly occurs. Co-immunoprecipitation studies showed that GRFT interacted with the envelope glycoprotein E1E2, and prevented subsequent interaction with one HCV receptor, CD81. In contrast, ELISA experiments showed that GRFT did not inhibit the binding of E2 to CD81 [. The infectivity is significantly inhibited by nonamannoside, indicating that like in the case of HIV, GRFT interacts with the high-mannose glycans on the surface of HCV. GRFT treatment in chimeric mice with livers engrafted with functional primary human hepatocytes showed significantly lower virus titers when compared with treatment with a GRFT mutant where the binding sites have been mutated to prevent binding to glycans. Even though mutations occurred upon exposure of HCV to GRFT, attempts to generate resistance against GRFT failed to detect specific envelope mutations that conferred resistance to the lectin.

 = = = Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Related Coronavirus (Sars-Cov) = = =

 The Coronaviridae are enveloped positive-strand viruses that are the causative agent of severe acute respiratory syndromes (SARS). Well-known strains and outbreaks include the SARS-CoV outbreak of 2002 and the MERS-CoV outbreak of 2012. GRFT has been shown to inhibit corona virus replication and cytopathicity induced by the SARS-CoV, as well as other Coronaviridae viruses. In particular, GRFT inhibited different strains of SARS-CoV infection in Vero 76 cells with an EC 50 in the low nanomolar range, with minimal toxicity on control cells [. GRFT binds glycans on the surface of the SARS-CoV spike glycoprotein S (S). A total of three molecules of GRFT are capable of binding the S in a dose dependent manner with very high affinity, a lower number when compared with HIV-gp120 probably due to the lower number of high-mannose glycans on the surface of S. Interestingly, such interaction does not inhibit the binding of the SARS-CoV S glycoprotein to the host cell human receptor angiotensin I converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) [.

Studies on mouse-adapted MA15 SARS-CoV showed that mice that received daily doses of intranasally administered GRFT had 100% survival rate, with no loss in weight, improved lung histopathology scores, and reduction of lung tissue virus titers, compared to the control group that experienced weight loss and had only a 30% survival rate. Further studies might prove GRFT as a good candidate molecule to treat respiratory infections.

 = = = Japanese Encephalitis Virus (Jev) = = =

 Japanese encephalitis virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus, similar to dengue, yellow fever and Zika. The envelope glycoprotein of JEV contains two potential glycosylation sites that are important for virus infection. It has been shown that GRFT can inhibit infection of baby hamster kidney (BHK)-21 cells with IC 50 in the nanomolar range, and that such inhibition is due to the interaction between GRFT and the glycosylated viral proteins (Envelope, E and premembrane, prM). Additionally, mice challenged with lethal doses of JEV showed reduced virus titers in the mouse brain and 100% survival rate compared with a 0% survival rate in the control group.

 = = = Herpes Simplex Virus Type-2 (Hsv-2) = = =

 In in vitro studies, GRFT showed weak-to-moderate activity in blocking HSV-2 entry, yet it was capable of inhibiting cell-to-cell spread with IC 50 s in the nanomolar range. In in vivo studies using a murine model, a gel containing 0.1% GRFT significantly protected mice from HSV-2 challenge compared to the control group. Further, it was shown to prevent viral spread post-challenge, and continued to protect when virus was introduced in seminal plasma. Though GRFT treatment led to a small decline in epithelial barrier integrity in polarized cell cultures, no increase in HIV migration was observed establishing its safety for HSV-2 prevention [. In vitro binding and immunoprecipitation studies suggest GRFT blocks HSV-2 infection by interacting with one of the four glycoproteins involved in HSV-2 entry, namely glycoprotein D.

 = = = Human Papilloma Virus (Hpv) = = =

 In vitro experiments have shown that GRFT has anti-HPV activity ranging from the high nanomolar to the low micromolar range. HPV is a non-enveloped virus. Interestingly, it was found that GRFT does not block the initial attachment of the virus to the cell; instead, it acts in a late step in the HPV entry process. Data suggests that GRFT interacts with the HPV secondary receptor α6 integrin, decreasing its availability on the cell surface. GRFT decreased HPV 16 pseudovirus (PsV) vaginal infection in a murine model.

 = = = Gamma-And Delta-Retroviruses = = =

 In a study investigating the effects of three lectins on delta and gamma retroviruses including human T cell leukemia virus, GRFT had no effect.

 = = = Activity Against Protists = = =

 Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted parasitic disease, caused by Trichomonas vaginalis. Development of microbicide agents against HIV can benefit also the prevention against Trichomonas. GRFT binds to the surface of Trichomonas and Tritrichomonas and causes flagellated trichomonads to undergo self-aggregation and precipitation. Such interaction is likely due to the binding of GRFT to unprocessed glycans on the surface of the parasite. Topical application of GRFT during infection with Tritichomonas in mice reduced the recovery of parasites in mice, but it did not eliminate it.

 = = = Toxicity And Immunogenicity Of Grft = = =

 The cytotoxicity profile of GRFT has been studied extensively. While GRFT is by now well known to prevent infection by a number of diverse viruses, there has been no sign of cellular toxicity against a variety of cells even at concentrations as high as 500 nM. If used as an antiviral therapeutic, the mode of GRFT administration may be determined by the mechanism through which the virus infects new hosts. For example, in the case of HIV, its most promising application is as a topical microbicide. Microbicides don't carry substantial risk of systemic side effects because they are unlikely to be absorbed efficiently. Alternatively, in respiratory infections via SARS-CoV, GRFT could be administered as an intranasal spray, or intravenously in the case of HCV.

Studies have shown that GRFT is stable and maintains similar anti-HIV activity after incubation for long periods of time in a variety of environments, including in the acidic (pH 4-6) cervical/vaginal lavage fluids from pig-tailed macaques. GRFT binds the outermost layer of the squamous epithelium (human cervical epithelium). However, no loss in cell viability of endocervical and ectocervical cell lines was observed even at doses of 1 mg/mL GRFT. In addition, GRFT does not induce cell proliferation in cervicovaginal cell lines in contrast with other lectins that show high cytotoxicity and significant mitogenic activity. Treatment of human cervical explants as well as cultured human endocervical, ectocervical and vaginal cell lines with GRFT, or intravaginal GRFT treatment of rabbits, have shown no significant perturbations on the levels of cytokines and chemokines. RNA microarray analysis of cultured ectocervical cells line showed that GRFT treatment has minimal alteration in the gene expression profile. An in vivo rabbit vaginal irritation (RVI) assay showed good safety profiles for GRFT, with no inflammatory responses or damage to epithelia. RVI testing is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to proceed for clinical testing.

HIV can infect PBMCs, which are often used in evaluating HIV infectivity. GRFT binds the surface of PMBCs and prevents viral replication even after washing the cells. However, exposure of human PBMCs for up to three days showed no mitogenic activity, that is, it does not stimulate lymphocyte proliferation. GRFT does not stimulate the expression of PMBC activation markers of immune activation (namely, markers for T cell activation) and it has minimal effect on cytokine and chemokine release on PMBC.

GRFT has also been proposed to treat respiratory infections such as SARS. In such cases, the protein would be administered intranasally. Preliminary studies where GRFT was administered intranasally against SARS-CoV infected mice showed that the levels of cytokines decreased compared those infected with SARS-CoV alone. Perivascular infiltrates were observed on GRFT-treated mice, however, no further analysis was performed.

Subcutaneous injection has been tested to show the potential of GRFT to treat HCV. Subcutaneous injection of GRFT in immunodeficient transgenic mice indicated that the lectin remained bioavailable even after 18 days, with only mild transient alterations in health parameters such as body weight and morbidity scores. However, prolonged dosing had deleterious effects on the overall health of these mice. The authors of this study suggest that this could be a consequence of the inherent fragility of the mouse model and not toxicity to implanted human hepatocytes. Treatment of HCV-challenged transgenic mice showed a 2.5 log reduction in the HCV viral titer for the GRFT-treated mice. In another HCV animal model, subcutaneous injections into chimeric mice harboring human hepatocytes in their livers resulted in two out of six animal deaths; similar to the previous study, the authors suggest that this is likely due to the fragile nature of the mice used in this model rather than lectin-induced toxicity. Lastly, intraperitoneal administration of GRFT to mice before a lethal dose of JEV resulted in 100% survival whereas none of the mice in the control group survived.

Pharmacokinetic properties of GRFT were further tested in two rodent models. Subcutaneous injections of high amounts of GRFT (50 mg/kg) showed that GRFT persists in plasma for at least two weeks, and sera tested in HIV infectivity assays demonstrated that the GRFT in sera retains antiviral activity during this time. All animals survived the high dose GRFT treatment, and some accumulation in spleen, kidney and liver was observed. Although minimal signs of toxicity were seen, juvenile animals showed weight loss compared to control animals. Importantly, the authors were unable to detect anti-GRFT antibodies in sera even in the high dose animals.

Another study assessed the immunogenicity of HIV-1 gp120 and Gag, in the presence and absence of GRFT. Immunization of mice with a gp120-GRFT complex enhanced the anti-gp120 response compared to mice immunized with gp120 alone, but immunization with a non-glycosylated Gag-GRFT complex had no effect on the levels of anti-Gag antibodies compared to immunization with Gag alone. Interestingly, an increased anti-GRFT immune response was observed in mice immunized with gp120-GRFT but not the Gag-GRFT complex, leading the authors to conclude that immunization with GRFT-bound gp120 may improve the humoral immune response to gp120.

 = = = Conclusions = = =

 GRFT belongs to a group of lectins capable of inhibiting HIV infection as well as infection by other enveloped viruses. GRFT binds the terminal mannose units present on high mannose oligosaccharides present on the surface of various viral envelope glycoproteins. Structural studies by X-ray crystallography and NMR have shown that the unique structure and distribution of mannose binding sites engender GRFT with an unprecedented ability to block HIV at much lower concentrations than other anti-HIV drugs. Even though GRFT has three mannose binding sites on each subunit, it has been shown that only two of them can be simultaneously engaged by the Man 9 oligosaccharide, leaving the third binding site available for binding a second Man 9 molecule. This precise distribution of carbohydrate binding sites together with the multivalent character of GRFT arising from its homo dimeric structure leads to the formation of a complex crosslinked network, likely one of the determining factors for its picomolar activity.

Given that the primary binding site of GRFT comprises the carbohydrates present on the surface of HIV-1 gp120, it was reasonable to evaluate the activity against other enveloped viruses. All the viruses that have been shown to be sensitive to GRFT inhibition contain moderate-to heavily-glycosylated envelopes, with a high density of high-mannose oligosaccharides present on many. The therapeutic potential of GRFT against these viruses will depend on the mode of entry of each virus. In closing, a growing body of literature has now established the remarkable potency, broad-spectrum anti-viral activity and safety profile of GRFT supporting its development as a microbicide, especially for diseases where preventative measures are unavailable.

